---
title: Stay on the pulse of open-source quantum simulation with Pulser and QuTiP
date: 24 January 2022
author:
---

Today two papers \[[[H. Silvério & S. Grijalva]{.ul} *[et
al.]{.ul}*](https://quantum-journal.org/papers/q-2022-01-24-629/), [[B.
Li]{.ul} *[et
al.]{.ul}*](https://quantum-journal.org/papers/q-2022-01-24-630/)\] on
quantum open source software projects supported by the Unitary Fund are
published in the open-access, community-driven journal
[*[Quantum]{.ul}*](https://quantum-journal.org/). The papers provide
information on **Pulser** and **qutip-qip**, two Python packages for the
pulse-level simulation of quantum programs on quantum computers.

[**[Pulser]{.ul}**](https://github.com/pasqal-io/Pulser) is a software
for controlling and simulating neutral-atom quantum processors. It
enables users to control the arrangement of qubits in arbitrary
geometries on Pasqal chips and to write sequences of laser pulses to be
applied on the system. A custom emulator relying on QuTiP is included to
reproduce the expected behavior of the hardware. The Pulser manuscript
can be found
[[here]{.ul}](https://quantum-journal.org/papers/q-2022-01-24-629/).

![](../../images/pulser.png){width="6.5in" height="3.1666666666666665in"}

An example of a pulse sequence for Bell state preparation created in
Pulser. Each channel changes its target qubit along the sequence and is
populated with pulses addressing a specific energy transition, thus
executing the necessary quantum gates. A detailed explanation can be
found in section 3.2 of the Pulser paper. [[H. Silvério & S.
Grijalva]{.ul} *[et al. Quantum]{.ul}* [**6**, 629
(2022)*.*]{.ul}](https://quantum-journal.org/papers/q-2022-01-24-629/)

*"We set out to develop Pulser based on the conviction that neutral-atom
quantum devices can only be fully put to use when the programmer has
hardware-specific knowledge and control. We are very proud to have
created an open-source tool that enables anyone to program and simulate
neutral-atom devices. Particularly, it opens the door to using the
devices as quantum simulators and analog quantum computers, giving users
the power to go beyond the quantum circuit model."* said Henrique
Silvério, head of the Quantum Libraries team at Pasqal and the main
developer behind Pulser.

The second paper illustrates the possibility to simulate noisy quantum
processors with the
[**[qutip-qip]{.ul}**](https://github.com/qutip/qutip-qip/) package from
the Quantum Toolbox in Python. It bridges the gap between the gate-level
circuit simulation and the simulation of quantum dynamics following the
master equation for various hardware models. Provided a Hamiltonian
model and a map between the quantum gate and control pulses, it can be
used to compile the circuit into the native gates of a given hardware,
generate the physical model described by control pulses and use QuTiP\'s
dynamical solvers to obtain the full-state time evolution.

The QuTiP QIP manuscript can be found
[[here]{.ul}](https://quantum-journal.org/papers/q-2022-01-24-630/).

![](../../images/qutip-qip.png){width="6.473144138232721in"
height="4.515629921259842in"}

Figure 3 from [[B. Li]{.ul} *[et al., Quantum]{.ul}* [**6**, 630
(2022)*.*]{.ul}](https://quantum-journal.org/papers/q-2022-01-24-630/)
